Tejas Shinde
BCA graduate, currently pursuing MSc - (Computer Applications) Data Science
	  

Tejas Ashok Shinde
A5-503 , Kohinoor Estate, Mula Road
Pune , 411003
+91 74477 75100
stejas44@gmail.com
tejasshinde@null.net
www.github.com/tejashinde
	ㅡ
Skills
	  

I have knowledge of :
Web Development
1. HTML5
2. CSS
3. Bootstrap
4. JavaScript
5. Flask
Development
1. Java EE / SE
2. Core Java
3. Scripting in Python
4. Android Studio Java, Application Development
	ㅡ
Experience
	  

Symbiosis Institute of Computer Studies and Research / 
Masters Student
2018-2020, PUNE
(Every document is made public onto my github)


NGO Work
I have worked for an NGO through the institute where in we had to develop a full stack website for e-shopping, including the cart mechanism and payment gateways. We were a group of 6 and we successfully completed the same in 2 months of time during the 3rd year of our bachelors program.


Application
As a part of our dissertation, Me and my colleague have developed and android application, which was related fully with the location of the user, It showed deals for restaurants, salons and many other activities inside the proximity of the user’s location. We used Java; Android Studio for the backend, XML and HTML5 for the frontend and Firebase as our database for user registration and followed on further.




Sentimental Analysis of Live Tweets on a topic
Currently I’m working on a full stack python project, which will scrape live twitter data and carry out a sentimental analysis on the same. The graph produced is dynamically live. Currently, Python and R being my main languages of interest, I have been working on many various datasets to reach out to conclusions and plot out some resourceful information.


Real time object detection
Python truly admires me, and every time I open up my notebook, I think of learning something new. I have had my shot at real object image recognition with a pre-trained model of MobileSSD, keras (tensorflow), opencv. 


Playing with datasets
I have been buzzing around datasets, be it on kaggle or gov, my aim as a Data Science specialisation student is to clean it, reach to conclusions and roll the graphs  out for further enhancements


Web Scraping with Beautiful Soup
One of my favourite things, is to scrape the data on the web and process it here on my machine. I have always been fascinated towards this, and since I read about this package in Python named Beautiful Soup, I have been using it all time long just for personal use.


A proper data pre-processing and visualization
I have worked on the NBA player stats data and drawn conclusions such as the best player, predictions were made, what kind of player plays the best on what position and many other handful of conclusions.


Xsemble 
Xsemble is basically a project oriented company which puts up some modules which collectively make a deliverable. We got a chance to deal with the industry level modules and solve them using Eclipse, Tomcat, gradle, Mockito framework and Junit test server. We actually got to know how a modularized project works


	ㅡ
Education
	  

Symbiosis Primary and Secondary School / Junior KG - 10th grade
Symbiosis College of Arts and Commerce / 11th & 12th Grades
Symbiosis Institute of Computer Studies and Research / Bachelors in Computer Applications (2015 - 2018)
Symbiosis Institute of Computer Studies and Research / Masters in Computer Science - Computer Applications, Specialization in Data Science (2018 - 2020)
	ㅡ
Awards
	  

IGX all India Hackathon 2nd prize.
Recently ranked 3rd in course, MSc CA Data Science 2018
Brazilian Soccer School, 1st Prize
School certificates for Volleyball, Soccer